---
layout: default
title: 11.7. Extres
nav_order: 7
parent: 11. Introducció a Symfony
has_children: false
---
# Extres
{: .no_toc }

## Taula de continguts
{: .no_toc .text-delta  .nocount }

1. TOC
{:toc}

## Internacionalització ##

### Installation

First, run this command to install the translator before using it:

```console
composer require symfony/translation
```

### Configuration

The previous command creates an initial config file where you can define the default locale of the application and the directory where the translation files are located:

```yaml

# config/packages/translation.yaml
framework:
    default_locale: 'en'
    translator:
        default_path: '%kernel.project_dir%/translations'
```


The locale used in translations is the one stored on the request. This is typically set via a `_locale` attribute on your routes (see The Locale and the URL).

### Basic Translation

Translation of text is done through the translator service (Translator). To translate a block of text (called a message), use the `trans()` method. Suppose, for example, that you're translating a simple message from inside a controller:

```php
// ...
use Symfony\Contracts\Translation\TranslatorInterface;

public function index(TranslatorInterface $translator)
{
    $translated = $translator->trans('Symfony is great');

    // ...
}
```

When this code is executed, Symfony will attempt to translate the message "Symfony is great" based on the locale of the user. For this to work, you need to tell Symfony how to translate the message via a "translation resource", which is usually a file that contains a collection of translations for a given locale. This "dictionary" of translations can be created in several different formats:

```yaml
# translations/messages.fr.yaml
Symfony is great: J'aime Symfony
```

For information on where these files should be located, see Translation Resource/File Names and Locations.

Now, if the language of the user's locale is French (e.g. fr_FR or fr_BE), the message will be translated into J'aime Symfony. You can also translate the message inside your templates.

### The Translation Process

To actually translate the message, Symfony uses the following process when using the trans() method:

1. The locale of the current user, which is stored on the request is determined.
2. If the message is located in the catalog, the translation is returned. If not, the translator returns the original message.

### Message Format

Sometimes, a message containing a variable needs to be translated:

```php
// ...
$translated = $translator->trans('Hello '.$name);
```

However, creating a translation for this string is impossible since the translator will try to look up the message including the variable portions (e.g. "Hello Ryan" or "Hello Fabien").

Another complication is when you have translations that may or may not be plural, based on some variable:

```
There is one apple.
There are 5 apples.
```

To manage these situations, Symfony follows the ICU MessageFormat syntax by using PHP's MessageFormatter class. Read more about this in How to Translate Messages using the [ICU MessageFormat](https://symfony.com/doc/current/translation/message_format.html).

[Translation in templates](https://symfony.com/doc/current/translation/templates.html)


### Extracting Translation Contents and Updating Catalogs Automatically 

The most time-consuming tasks when translating an application is to extract all the template contents to be translated and to keep all the translation files in sync. Symfony includes a command called translation:update that helps you with these tasks:

```bash
php bin/console translation:update --dump-messages --output-format=yaml fr

php bin/console translation:update --force --output-format=yaml fr

php bin/console translation:update --help
```

### Translation Resource/File Names and Locations

Symfony looks for message files (i.e. translations) in the following default locations:

 * the translations/ directory (at the root of the project);
 * the Resources/translations/ directory inside of any bundle.

The locations are listed here with the highest priority first. That is, you can override the translation messages of a bundle in the first directory.

The override mechanism works at a key level: only the overridden keys need to be listed in a higher priority message file. When a key is not found in a message file, the translator will automatically fall back to the lower priority message files.

The filename of the translation files is also important: each message file must be named according to the following path: `domain.locale.loader`:

* domain: An optional way to organize messages into groups.
* locale: The locale that the translations are for (e.g. en_GB, en, etc);
* loader: How Symfony should load and parse the file (e.g. xlf, php, yaml, etc).

The loader can be the name of any registered loader. By default, Symfony provides many loaders.

The choice of which loader to use is entirely up to you and is a matter of taste. The **recommended option is to use YAML for simple projects** and use XLIFF if you're generating translations with specialized programs or teams.

